# *slendr* 0.1 (upcoming first public release)

## New functionality

- Geographic landscapes and coordinate systems are no longer tied to a
  geographic location on Earth and can be fully abstract (including
  completely arbitrary shapes of the "continents", geographic barriers
  etc.).

- It is now possible to define models in forward or backwards
  direction, depending on what is more convenient for the user and the
  scenario that is being modeled. The direction of time is
  automatically detected and translated to SLiM's units of generations
  in the forward direction.

- Spatial interaction distances (translated to `maxDistance` on the
  SLiM side) as well as offspring distances from parents (i.e. the
  standard deviations of their normal distributions) can now be
  specified for each population individually. The users can still
  provide default values for all populations (or just those which did
  not have their own dedicated parameter values) in the main
  `compile()` call. These parameters can also change dynamically over
  time by calling the `dispersal()` function.

- Sampling ("remembering") of individuals for tree-sequence recording can
  now be scheduled with the `sampling()` function.

- A basic interface to _tskit_ has been implemented: loading, recapitating,
  and simplifying tree-sequence data, conversion to genotype file formats
  such as EIGENSTRAT (`ts_eigenstrat()`) and VCF (`ts_vcf()`), a couple of
  population genetics [statistical functions](../reference/index.html#section-tree-sequence-statistics) (all with the `ts_*` prefix) have also been implemented. More is to come, but
  the goal here is to focus *only* on loading tree-sequences and calculating
  population genetics statistics on simulated tree-sequence data, nothing more.
  Only the things desirable (and sensible) to do within R and its limitations
  will be implemented. All of the *tskit*/*pyslim* functionality is accessed
  via the [_reticulate_](https://rstudio.github.io/reticulate/index.html)
  package. See a [dedicated vignette](../articles/vignette-05-tree-sequences.html)
  for an example of the tree-sequence functionality in *slendr*.

- New set operations for manipulating spatial regions: `join()`,
  `overlap()`, `subtract()`. These can be used to build more complex
  population boundaries and geographic regions from smaller ones.

- New [shiny](http://shiny.rstudio.com)-based interactive exploration
  "app": `explore()`. The functions accepts a compiled `slendr_model`
  object (i.e. a formal configuration of spatial population dynamics
  and gene flow events) and the package will spawn a browser app with
  a time slider. This can be used to inspect the model spatial
  dynamics interactively before they are sent over to the SLiM side.

- New functions `distance()` (for computing distances between
  geographic objects), `dimensions()` (which calculates the
  dimension of the world map in the "real" projected units), and `area()`
  (for calculating the geographic area covered by any spatial object)
  have been added.

- Simulations of marine species are now possible. This required adding
  a single argument `aquatic = TRUE` to the `population()` call which
  instructs the population range rendering procedure during
  compilation to "invert' intersection with landscape features
  (subtracting land instead of water, which is done for terrestrial
  species).

- A function `resize()` for scheduling changes in population size (in
  a single step, or as an exponential growth/shrinking) is
  implemented.

- A new `shrink()` function (analogous to `expand()`) is implemented.

- Five new vignettes have been added (available under "Articles" on
  the [project website](../index.html)).

## Nonspatial simulations

- _slendr_ can now simulate "normal" nonspatial models. This is
  triggered by leaving the `map = FALSE` in the `population()`
  "constructor" function call. All populations descending from that
  population will then be nonspatial, and the whole compiled model
  will be run in the nonspatial model on the SLiM side. A short
  [example vignette](../articles/vignette-04-nonspatial-models.html)
  demonstrating this feature has been added.

## Changes to the R interface

- Renamed `admixture()` to `geneflow()`.

- The number of intermediate "spatial snapshots" generated by `move()`
  and `expand()`/`shrink()` is now determined iteratively instead of
  forcing the user to specify this by themselves (which is something
  they would have to do manually anyway and was very annoying to deal
  with). If the user specifies the integer parameter `snapshots`, the
  search is not performed and the specified value is used to generate
  intermediate spatial maps.

## Changes to the SLiM backend

- Significant overhaul of the entire [SLiM
  layer](https://github.com/bodkan/slendr/blob/main/inst/extdata/backend.slim). Most
  importantly, complex and ugly hacks approximating dataframe behavior
  using SLiM matrices and custom functions are completely replaced by
  Dictionaries. The intention of the SLiM backend is to be as easy to
  understand as possible and as transparent as possible. If something
  could be written more elegantly or in a simpler way, please file a
  GitHub issue as I considered this a bug.

## Other changes

- Almost two hundred new unit tests checking the consistency of the R
  interface (misspecified event times, etc.) as well as the
  correctness of the SLiM simulation runs programmed by *slendr*.
